Add design proposal on registry structure (#245)
devfile/api: docs/proposals/registry/registry-structure.md

# Devfile Registry Structure
This document outlines the structure of a Devfile Registry Repository that’s used as the basis for an OCI Devfile Registry, hosted on Kubernetes. It also outlines how individual files in each stack will get pushed up to the OCI registry.

This design proposal is a follow up to [Devfile Registry Packaging](https://github.com/devfile/api/blob/master/docs/proposals/registry/devfile-packaging.md) and I recommend reading that first.

> ## Terminology

Author: Good idea. I'll create a separate terminology doc

> ## Terminology

Author: Added.

**Registry Bootstrap:** The process that pushes the devfile stacks on the devfile index container to the OCI registry.

## As-is Today
Currently, the top-level structure of a devfile registry’s repository is unwritten, but it usually consists of a **devfiles** or **stacks** folder, and any associated files specific to that registry

[devfile/registry](https://github.com/devfile/registry):
<img width="914" alt="Screen Shot 2020-11-30 at 2 12 13 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6880023/100653219-12a48100-3316-11eb-949c-38073a19acbc.png">

Inside each **stacks** or **devfiles** folder, each folder corresponds to a devfile stack, containing usually just the devfile.yaml and a meta.yaml:
<img width="1232" alt="Screen Shot 2020-11-30 at 2 10 50 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6880023/100653095-e2f57900-3315-11eb-8c3f-86e56896ef15.png">

<img width="1229" alt="Screen Shot 2020-11-30 at 2 11 20 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6880023/100653133-f0aafe80-3315-11eb-8393-dbabfd8ce0d6.png">

> As part of the registry build, the index.json is generated based off of the stacks in the repository, and a devfile index image is generated containing the index.json and stacks.

Author: Updated 👍

When deploying the OCI registry, the registry bootstrap process parses the index.json to find the devfile.yaml for each stack, and pushes the devfile up to the registry as a single layer. No other stack artifacts are pushed up as part of the layer, or as separate layer.

## Problem
Our approach of pushing only the devfile.yaml works fine currently because the stacks we’re pushing only have a devfile.yaml in them. However, devfile stacks may contain more than _just_ the devfile, and may also contains resources that are re-used across multiple stacks (such as certain vsx plugins).

> We need a defined way of knowing what files in a stack to push up in a, what layers each file in the stack should belong to, and where the stack's files should located. 

Reviewer: Should "...push up in a,..." be "...push up,..."

Author: Yes, updated.

## Proposal

To solve the issue listed above, we should:

> 1) Formally the expected structure of the Devfile Regisry Repository.

Reviewer 2: minor typos:
```suggestion
1) Formalize the expected structure of the Devfile Registry Repository.
```

Author: Gah, thanks. The `t` key on my laptop has recently started only working like half the time, so I've had lots of `regisry` -> `registry` corrections to do in the past week haha.

Reviewer 2: We're watching technology degrade in real-time during this pandemic ;) I need to mash my spacebar to get it to register.

2) Define the layers that compose a devfile stack on an OCI registry, and what each layer contains.

### Repository Structure
The structure of the “Devfile Registry Repository” should impose the following requirements:

> 1) A top-level folder called `stacks`, which contains folders for each devfile stack.

Reviewer: FYI...In the future, chances are we need to differentiate between stacks and samples/examples and we may call the folder that contains samples/examples `samples` or `apps`. But that is more for the future. I think it's good for us to call this folder `stacks` here.

Author: Good to know, I'll keep that in mind 👍

2) Each devfile stack folder must contain a `devfile.yaml`. Other files such as vsx plugins, stack logos, etc. can be included as needed.

> 3) A Dockerfile to package the stacks and index.json (see https://github.com/devfile/api/blob/master/docs/proposals/registry/devfile-packaging.md)

Reviewer: I think we need to be careful about the role of Dockerfile on the top level of the stack. In devfile 2.2 where we introduce the outer loop support, a stack may contain a Dockerfile for building the user application. If we put the packaging stack Dockerfile on the top level of the stack folder, we'll have problems in devfile 2.2. We can consider putting the packaging stack Dockerfile to a reserved folder, e.g. `buildResources`, to avoid potential conflicts in the future.

Author: So the Dockerfile and build tools mentioned here actually the registry dockerfile and build tools, not for each individual stack. I just wanted to include them since we were talking about the structure of the devfile registry repository. I'll change it to be something like:
```
In addition to the registry's Dockerfile and build tools, the following requirements are imposed on the devfile registry repository:
 1) A top-level folder called `stacks`, which contains folders for each devfile stack.
2) Each devfile stack folder must contain a `devfile.yaml`. Other files such as vsx plugins, stack logos, etc. can be included as needed. 
```

That being said, did we want to include a reserved folder for the stack's build tools as well, or just leave it up to each stack author?

Author: Updated to remove the mentions of the Dockerfile and build scripts for the registry, as discussed on today's meeting.

The registry build tools and Dockerfile will be moved to the registry-support repo.

> 4) Build scripts or tools for the registry (see https://github.com/devfile/api/blob/master/docs/proposals/registry/devfile-packaging.md)

Reviewer: These files can be put under the `buildResources` folder as well (see above).

Author: See my other comment (the build tools referenced here are the registry build tools, not the stack's build tools)

### Layer Media types
Currently, when we push devfile stacks to an OCI registry, it's pushed as a single layer, using the `application/vnd.devfileio.devfile.layer.v2+yaml` media type. We should instead be pushing the stack as a multi-layer artifact, adding the additional layers:

**VSX Plugins**

`*.vsx` -> `application/vnd.devfileio.vsx.layer.v1.tar`

**Stack logos**

`logo.svg` -> `image/svg+xml` or

`logo.png` -> `image/png`

**Everything else**

`archive.tar` - `application/x-tar`

As part of the registry build process that packages the stacks into a container image, any files not belonging to the devfile, vsx or logo media types will be lumped together in a tar archive (using the media type `application/x-tar`).

When the registry bootstrap process pushes the stack up to the OCI registry, each file belonging to one of the above media types (`devfile.yaml`, `*.vsx`, `logo.svg`/`logo.png`, `archive.tar`) will be treated as separate layers in the artifact.

### Index.json Modification
The index.json already includes a link to a stack’s devfile, which the registry bootstrap process parses when pushing devfiles up to the registry. 

> To make it easier to bootstrap the registry, and to avoid having to programmatically find which files to push individually; as part of the registry build process, include a new `layers` array in the index.json that tells the registry bootstrap process which layers the stack is composed of:

Reviewer: Should we call this `resources` or `artifacts` instead of `layers`?

Author: I went with `layers` since that's what OCI uses, and since we'll probably need to use the files specified in `layers` when we implement caching on a per-layer basis.

But it is just a name, and I'm flexible either way with `resources` or `layers`.

Author: Updated to change to `resources`.

```
{
    "name": "java-maven",
    "displayName": "Maven Java",
    "description": "Upstream Maven and OpenJDK 11",
    "tags": [
      "Java",
      "Maven"
    ],
    "projectType": "maven",

>     "language": "java",

Reviewer: I find this sample is a bit confusing. We have `projectType` and `language` but we also have the `tags` that represent the same info.

Author: Those were just included in the sample index.json that I grabbed, they're nothing that I'm adding to the spec. I can remove them from the example.

Author: Updated.
